Networking protocol - A set of rules, algorithms, messages, and other mechanisms that enable software and hardware in networked devices to communicate effectively.

Default HTTP port - Port 80 is the default port for HTTP

TCP (Transmission Control Protocol) - Works at both ends of most Internet communication to ensure a perfect copy of a message is sent.

TCP Handshake - The protocol by which a client and server machine establish communication for the transfer of data.

TCP handshake process - It is a three-way handshake.
The client sends a SYN packet.
The server responds with SYN/ACK.
The client responds with ACK.
SYN -> SYN/ACK -> ACK

TCP/IP (Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol) - This traffic is either connection-oriented TCP traffic or connectionless UDP.

UDP (User Datagram Protocol) - connectionless protocol that does not require a connection to send a packet and does not guarantee that the packet arrives at its destination.

Example of UDP - ICMP traffic such as ping command and audio/video streaming use UDP.

IP - Internet protocol identifies hosts in a TCP/IP network and delivers traffic from one host to another using IP address.

IPv4 - The Internet Protocol version 4 is the dominant protocol for routing traffic on the Internet, specifying "to" and "from" addresses using a dotted decimal such as "122.45.255.0".
It is 32-bit address.

IPv6 - The Internet Protocol version 6 provides a large number of new addresses to route Internet traffic, using "from" and "to" addresses written as colon-hexadecimal notation, such as "fe80::42:acff:feaa:1bf0".
It is a 128-bit address protocol.

ICMP - Internet Control Message Protocol
It is used for testing basic connectivity and includes tools such as ping, pathping and tracert.

ARP - Address resolution protocol.
It resolves IPv4 address to Media Access Control (MAC) address.
It is also called physical or hardware address.

Use of ARP - The TCP/IP transfer the packet from one network to another.
The ARP ensures that the packet reaches the correct host.

ARP poisoning - ARP packets to give clients false hardware address updates and attackers use it to redirect or interrupt network traffic.
an attack that convinces the network that the attacker's MAC address is the one associated with an allowed address so that traffic is wrongly sent to the attacker's machine.

NDP - Neighbor Discovery Protocol 
A protocol that is part of the IPv6 protocol suite, used to discover and exchange information about devices on the same subnet (neighbors). In particular, it replaces the IPv4 ARP protocol.

Protocols based on Use Cases - Voce and Video Use Case
File Transfer Use Case
Email and Web Use Case
Directory Services Use Case
Remote Access Use Case
Time Synchronization Use Case
Network Address Allocation Use Case
Domain Name resolution Use Case
Subscription Service Use Case

Voice and Video Use Case - UDP is commonly used.
RTP - Real Time Transport protocol delivers audio and video over IP networks.

SRTP - Secure Real Time Protocol
A streaming audio and video protocol that uses AES for confidentiality and SHA-1 for integrity.
It provides protection against replay attacks.
SRTP can be used for both unicast and multi-cast transmission.

File transfer Use Case - Some use cases are -
transmit data, ensure confidentiality, ensure secure connection.

Data-in-transit - Any traffic sent over a network.

FTP - File Transfer Protocol 
an internet standard that permits file uploading and downloading to and from other computers on the internet

Modes in FTP - Active mode - TCP 21 Control signals
 TCP 20 Data
Passive mode - TCP 21 control signals
 TCP random for Data

TFTP - Trivial File Transfer Protocol
A simple version of FTP that uses UDP port 69 as the transport protocol, and does not require a logon to the remote host.

SSH - Secure Shell
It encrypts traffic in transit and can be used to encrypt other protocols such as FTP.

SCP - Secure Copy Protocol
SCP was one of the first protocols used to transfer data securely between two hosts and thus might have replaced FTP. SCP works well but lacks features such as a directory listing.

SSL - Secure Sockets Layer.
It was the primary method used to secure HTTP traffic as Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS).
It also decrypts other traffic like SMTP, LDAP but it is not recommended.

TLS - (Transport Layer Security) An update of the Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) protocol for encrypting data before it is transmitted over a network

STARTTLS - A command (not an acronym) used to upgrade an unencrypted connection to an encrypted connection on the same port.

IPSec (Internet Protocol Security) - A set of open, non-proprietary standards that you can use to secure data as it travels across the network or the Internet through data authentication and encryption.

Two main components of IPsec - Authentication Header (AH)
Encapsulating security payload (ESP)

Authentication Header (AH) - This provides connectionless integrity and the authentication of data. It also provides protection versus replay attacks. Protocol ID number 51.

Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) - An IPSec component that provides the same services as AH but also provides confidentiality when sending data.
Protocol ID number 50.

Internet Key Exchange (IKE) - Used by IPSec to create a master key, which is in turn used to generate bulk encryption keys for encrypting data. It uses UDP over port 500 to create a security association for the VPN.

SFTP - Secure File Transfer Protocol. An extension of Secure Shell (SSH) using SSH to transmit the files in an encrypted format. SFTP transmits data using TCP port 22.

FTPS - File Transfer Protocol Secure. An extension of FTP that uses SSL or TLS to encrypt FTP traffic. Some implementations of FTPS use ports 989 and 990.

Difference SFTP and FTPS - SFTP - SSH
FTPS - TLS

SSL drawback - Vulnerable to POODLE attack.
Padding oracle on Downgraded Legacy Encryption.

Email and web use cases - Common protocols - 
SMTP, POP3 and Secure POP, IMAP4 and secure IMAP,
HTTP, HTTPS.

SMTP - Simple Mail Transfer Protocol.
It transfers mail between clients and SMTP servers.
It uses TCP 25.
It unofficially uses port 465 with SSL and port 587 with TLS.

POP3 and Secure POP - Post Office Protocol v3 transfers email from server down to clients.
It uses TCP port 110.
Encrypts with SSL or TLS and use TCP 995.

IMAP4 and Secure IMAP - Internet Message Access Protocol version 4.
It is used to store email on an email server.
Allows user to organize and manage email in folders on the server.
It uses port 143.
Uses port 993 with SSL or TLS.

HTTP - Hypertext Transfer Protocol transmits web traffic on the internet and in intranets.
Common language to display web pages.

HTTPS - It encrypts web traffic.
Encrypted with SSL or TLS and it uses 443.

Directory service use case - Network operating system commonly use a directory service to streamline management and implement security.
A common use case is to provide secure access to the internet access the network.
Kerberos, LDAP, Group policy.

Kerberos - It is an authentication protocol.
It uses key distribution center to issue timestamped tickets.
It uses UDP 88.

LDAP - A protocol used to access information stored in a directory.
It provides clear syntax for object identification and management.
It uses TCP port 389.

LDAPS - Lightweight Directory Access Protocol Secure.
Encrypts data with TLS using TCP port 636.

Group policy - Administrators use Group policy objects to configure settings.
They apply these to GPOs to users and computers within the domain.

Remote access use case - administrators implement SSH to meet a use case of supporting remote access.
Connect to remote systems for administration and secure the Netcat transmission with SSH.

Different method for remote access - SSH, Netcat, RDP, VPN

RDP - Admins and clients use this to access remote systems.
It uses TCP port 3389 or UDP 3389.
TCP 3389 is more common.

VPN relate to remote access - It is another method of supporting remote access use cases is with a virtual private network(VPN).

Time synchronization use case - Systems need to be using the same time.
example Kerberos - all systems are synchronized within five minutes of each other.

Windows Time Service - It is used to locate reliable Internet server running the Network Time Protocol.

NTP - a protocol used to synchronize clocks on network devices.
It uses complex algorithms and queries.
It is more accurate

SNTP - Simple Network Time Protocol; port 123.
It is simple and doesn't use these algorithms.
It is not accurate as NTP.

Network address allocation use case - IP address allocation to hosts.
2 ways - manually, DHCP

DHCP - Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol. A service used to dynamically assign TCP/IP configuration information to clients. DHCP is often used to assign IP addresses, subnet masks, default gateways, DNS server addresses, and much more.
UDP 67, 68

Private IP address - Addresses used by organizations for nodes that need IP connectivity only within their enterprise network, but not external
connections to the Internet.
Private networks should only have private IP addresses.
These are formally defined in RFC 1918.
Unique local addresses start with the prefix of fc00.

Domain name resolution use case - It resolves the host names to IP addresses.
It uses DUP 53.

Basic DNS query - Sometimes DNS response instantly with IP(cache).
Sometimes it contacts another DNS for IP(DNS search).

DNS Zones - DNS Servers host data in zones, like database.

Records in Zones - A, AAAA, PTR, MX, CNAME, SOA

A - It is also called host record.
It records host name and IPv4 address.
Client requests with forward lookup request, DNS responds with IPv4 address.

AAAA - Record holds IPv6.

PTR - Pointer Record
Reverse DNS lookups; DNS client queries DNS with the IP address and is replied to with a name

MX - Mail Exchanger record
the host name for the mail server

CNAME - A canonical name record is an alias of an existing record, thus allowing multiple DNS records to map to the same IP address.

SOA - Start of Authority
It includes information about the DNS zone and some of its settings.
Time to Live setting

Time to Live - It determines setting to determine how long to cache DNS results.
TTL times are in seconds.

Berkeley Internet Name Domain (BIND) - Most DNS server runs on this software with Unix or Linux OS.

Microsoft DNS software - Microsoft networks use Microsoft DNS software.

DNS zone transfers - DNS server share information with each other in a process known as a zone transfer.
It include small number of updated records or all the records.
It uses TCP port 53 for zone transfer.
It uses UDP port 53 for name resolution queries.

DNS Poisoning - An attack that substitutes DNS addresses so that the computer is automatically redirected to an attacker's device or a website.

Method of DNS cache poisoning - One way is to modify the A or AAAA record in the DNS cache so it will send users to the IP address of the malicious web site.

DNSSEC - Domain Name System Security Extensions. A suite of specifications used to protect the integrity of DNS records and prevent DNS poisoning attacks.
It adds digital signature to each record that provides integrity.

DNSSEC-enabled response - It is digitally signed record, the DNS server will know that it is a valid response.

NSLOOKUP - A utility that is used to test and troubleshoot domain name servers.
It can be used to verify that a DNS server can resolve specific host names or fully qualified domain names(FQDNs) to IP address.

FQDNS - Fully Qualified Domain Name includes the host name and domain name.

Dig command - It is a command line tool in Linux.
It is used to verify that the DNS server is reachable and it can resolve names to IP address.

@symbol - It is used to identify a specific DNS server.
The prefix '@' refers to the domain name itself -- it essentially means no prefix.
This is useful to pull all the records from a DNS zone.

*symbol - something that stands for something else.
The prefix * is a wildcard -- if a DNS request is made for an address that does not have a specific A record setup, then the wildcard IP address will be returned.

Subscription services use case - It refers to subscription-based business model.
Instead of selling software it uses a subscription model where users have to pay over time.

Subscription services use case protocols - It mainly uses HTTPS for secure connection.
Database servers maintain database of customers, along with the products they're renting.
The connection is made secure with the help of HTTPS or TLS.
System send automated emails to customers using SMTP when subscription is near end.

Ports - Ports are logical numbers used by TCP/IP to identify what service or application should handle data received by a system.

Number of ports - Both TCP and UDP use 65,536 ports

Data transmission with ports - Admins open ports on firewalls and routers to allow the associated protocol into or out of a network.

Disable unnecessary ports and services. - when the ports and services are disabled then it will block any attacks on these ports, services, and protocols.

IANA - Internet Assigned Numbers Authority
It maintains a list of official port assignments.
They are divided into three ranges.

Three ranges of IANA - 1. Well-known ports: 0-1023
It assigns to commonly used protocols.
2. Registered ports: 1024-49,151
It registers these ports for companies, or multiple companies have the same port for a specific standard like Microsoft SQL server uses port 1443.
3. Dynamic and private ports: 49,152-65,535
It is available for use by any application.
It use ports to temporarily map an application to a port.

Temporary ports - Use to map and application to a port. These temporary ports are often called ephemeral ports indicating that they are short lived.

Port scanner - Software to search a system for any port vulnerabilities.

Combining IP address and the port - TCP/IP -> system -> port -> service or application.
The TCP/IP uses IP to reach to the destination system and the it uses port to reach the specific application.

IP address used to locate hosts - TCP/IP uses these IP addresses to get the packets from your computer to the web server and the web server's answer back to your computer.

Server ports - When the system receives traffic with destination port of 80, the system know to send it to the service handling HTTP.
Popular web servers include Apache and Internet Information services (IIS).

Client ports - TCP/IP works with the client OS to maintain a table of client-side ports.
This table associates port numbers with different application that are expecting return traffic.
Client side ports start at 49,152 up to 65,535.
When all used it will start over.

Client ports working - Browser-> system -> unused port -> web server -> system -> unused port -> browser -> display
--------------------------------------------------------------
Request
DN IP - 192.168.0.1
DN PORT - 80
SRC IP - 192.168.0.105
SRC PORT - 49,152

Response
DN IP - 192.168.0.105
DN PORT - 49,152
SRC IP - 192.168.0.1
SRC PORT - 80

Ports in security - Client firewall doesn't need to allow incoming traffic on port 80 for this to work. The web client isn't hosting a web server with HTTP, so the client firewall would block incoming traffic on port 80.

Port security and ACLs - It professionals modifying access control lists ACLs on routers and firewalls commonly refer to this as opening a port to allow traffic or closing port to block traffic.

host - Any device with an IP address is a host, it is often referred as clients or nodes.

Switch - It connect hosts together in a network.
It can learn which computer attached to each of its physical ports.
It uses this knowledge to create internal switched connection when two computers communicate with each other.

Unicast - one on one communication

Broadcast - one computer to all computers in the network

Switching method - When a computer sends its firsts packet it will also append the mac address so it will be stored in the internal table.

Security benefit of a switch - Protocols would not capture traffic going through the switch to other ports.
Attacker can capture traffic in hub because its sends packets to all the ports.
Switches also increase the efficiency of a network.

Port security in switches - Port security limits the computer that can connect to physical ports on a switch.
Administrators disable unused ports.
MAC address filtering is another example of port security.
It can also be configured to accept traffic only from a specific MAC address.
Labor intensive but provides high security.

Physical security of a switch - Many switches have a console port that administrators can use to monitor all traffic.
The monitoring port will see all traffic in or out of the switch.
This is good for troubleshooting.
It need to be protected in a secure area to prevent an attacker from gaining access to it.

Switching loop or bridge loop - When a user connects two ports of a switch together with a cable, it create a switching loop where the switch continuously send and resends unicast transmission

Broadcast storm - High number of broadcast packets in short period of time.

Spanning tree problem - It is a link management protocol that provides path redundancy while preventing undesirable loops in the network.
In ethernet networks, only one active path can exist between two station in order for then to function properly.
STP has three states listening, blocking, disabled, learning, forwarding, broken.

RSTP - Rapid Spanning Tree Protocol. An improvement over STP.
It includes discarding, learning, forwarding.
discarding replaces disabled, blocking and listening.

Flood attacks - A MAC flood attack attempts to overload a switch with different MAC addresses associated with the physical port.

Mac flood attack method - An attacker send a large amount of traffic with spoofed MAC address to the same port.

Result of MAC flood attack - Switch runs out of memory to store all the MAC addresses and enters fail-open state.
It works as a hub, so an attacker can use protocol analyzer to collect all the traffic.

Flood guard - 1. It limits the amount of memory used to store MAC addresses for each port.
2. It sets the port to support only 1 MAC address.

Flood guard action - Alert -> It will send a Simple Network Management protocol trap or error message in response.
Action -> Disable update of MAC entries and disable port.

Router - A router connects multiple network segments together into a single network and traffic between the segments.
segment separated by a router can significantly improve overall performance.
Subnetting networks create separate broadcast domains.

Routers and ACLs - Rules to identify what traffic is allowed and what traffic is denied.
rule-based management for the router and control inbound and outbound traffic.
It provides basic packet filtering.

Router ACLs filter packets - They filter packets based on IP address, ports, ICMP or IPsec.

IP address and networks ACL - A rule to block access from any single computer based on the IP address.
Block traffic from one subnet to another.

Ports ACL - Filter traffic based on logical ports.
Block incoming, outgoing or both traffic.

Protocol numbers ACL - ICMP used for DOS. Block all ICMP traffic by blocking traffic using this protocol number.
Same with other protocols it can be blocked if necessary.

Implicit deny - It indicates that all traffic that isn't explicitly allowed is implicitly denied.

Antispoofing - An attacker often spoofs IP with a different IP to hide the actual source of the packet.
Antispoofing is to modify access list to allow or block IP addresses. Private IP used in Private network - allowed.
Private IP on internet is a spoofed IP.

Bridge - A network bridge connects multiple networks together and can be used instead of a router in some situations.

Working of bridge - It directs traffic based on the destination MAC address.
It learns MAC address by analyzing traffic and storing the information in an internal table.

Firewall - It filters incoming and outgoing traffic for a single host or between networks.
It can also block users from going to places that an administrator deems dangerous.
It supports advanced content filtering.

Types of firewall - 1. Host-based firewall
2. Application-based firewall
3. Network-based firewall
4. stateless firewall
5. stateful firewall
6. web application firewall

Host-based firewall - It monitors traffic going in and out of a single host, such as server or a work station.
It monitors traffic passing through the NIC and prevent intrusion into the computer via the NIC.
software-based firewalls used as host-based firewalls.

Configuration in windows - It can be configured to allow or restrict inbound traffic and outbound rules to allow or restrict outbound traffic.

Configuration in Linux - Linux systems support IPtables and many addition to iptables, such as ipv6, arptables and so on.
Administrator commonly refer these as xtables.
These rules work just like ACL.

Application-based firewall - Software running in a system.
Host-based firewall are commonly application-based.

Network-based firewall - A network-based firewall is usually a dedicated system with additional software to monitor, filter and log traffic.
A network-based firewall would have two or more network interface cards(NICs) and all traffic passes through the firewall.

Stateless firewall - A firewall that manages each incoming packet as a stand-alone entity without regard to currently active connections. Stateless firewalls are faster than stateful firewalls, but are not as sophisticated.
It has a security issue that it can be misconfigured ACLs.

Stateless firewall format - 1. Permission
2. protocol
3. source
4. destination
5. port or protocol

Stateless firewall permission - PERMIT or ALLOW to allow the traffic.
DENY to block the traffic.

Stateless firewall Protocol - TCP or UDP to block.
When you need to block both using the same port then block the IP address.

Stateless firewall source - Traffic comes from a source IP address.(to block them)
Wildcards such as ANY or ALL to include all IP address.

Stateless firewall destination - Traffic is addressed to a destination IP address.(block them to access).
wildcards such as ANY or ALL to include all IP address.

Stateless firewall port or protocol - Port or protocol to access the services or application.
(to block)eq for equal, lt for less than, gt for greater than.

Stateful firewall - A stateful firewall inspects traffic and makes decision based on the context, or state, of the traffic.
It inspects traffic based on its state within a session.
TCP session need 3-way handshake to establish session, if it detects session without the handshake then it recognizes this as suspicious traffic and can block it.

Web application firewall - It is designed to protect a web application, which is commonly hosted on a web server.
It is between server and client.

DMZ - Demilitarized Zone
It is a buffer zone between the internet and internal network.
It allows access to services while segmenting access to the internal network.
Internet clients can access services hosted on servers in DMZ.
DMZ provides a layer of protection for the intranet.

NAT - Network address translation is a protocol that translate public IP address to private IP addresses and private addresses back to public.
It is enabled on an Internet-facing firewall.
Network address and port translation, commonly called port address translation(PAT).
Home router uses NAT.

Benefits of NAT - 1. Public IP address don't need to be purchased for all clients.
2. NAT hides internal computers from the internet.

Drawbacks of NAT - IT is not compatible with IPsec.

Types of NAT - 1. Static NAT
2. Dynamic NAT

Static NAT - A single public IP address in a one-to-one mapping.
It maps private IP address with single public IP address.

Dynamic NAT - It uses multiple public IP address in a one-to-many mapping.
It decides which public IP address to use based on load.

Network separation - 1. segregation - provides basic separation.
2. segmentation - refers to putting traffic on different segments.
3. Isolation - indicates the systems are completely separate.

Physical isolation - It ensures that a network isn't connected to any other network

Physical isolation example - SCADA - supervisory control and data acquisition, 
it is common to ensure that they are isolated from any other network.

Airgap - It is a metaphor for physical isolation, indicating that there is a gap of air between an isolated system and other system.

Classification of airgap - If it is classified then it is red.
If it is unclassified then it is black.
Red must be physically separated from black cables.

Logical separation and segmentation - Router and firewall provide basic level of separation and segmentation.
Administrators use subnetting to divide larger IP address ranges into smaller ranges.

Layer 2 switch - A type of switch that switches packets based on the MAC address.

Layer 3 switch - A type of switch that operates as a router (layer 3).
It switches packets based on IP address.
It is not susceptible to ARP-based attacks.

Isolating traffic with VLAN - A VLAN uses a switch to group several different computers into a virtual network.
Group the computers based on department or function, and isolate traffic between the computers in the VLAN.

Isolating traffic with VLAN with Layer 3 switch - A single Layer 3 switch can create multiple VLANs to separate the computers based on logical need rather than physical location.
Administrator can easily add and subtract computers from VLANs.

Media Gateway - A device that converts media data from one format to another.

Proxy server - It forwards requests for services from clients.
It provides caching to improve performance and reduce internet bandwidth usage.
It monitors online activity and logs that record.

Transparent proxy - It will accept and forward requests without modifying them. 
It is simple to setup and provides caching.

Non-transparent proxy - It can modify or filter requests.
It can restrict what user can access with the use or URL filters.

URL filter - It examines the requested URL and chooses to allow the request or deny the request.

Reverse proxy - A reverse proxy accepts a request from a client, forwards it to a server that can fulfill it, and returns the server's response to the client

Application proxy - It accepts requests, forwards the requests to the appropriate server and then sends the response to the original requestor.
internet application exchange data using application programming interfaces(API).

UTM - Unified threat management is a single solution that combines multiple security controls and also simplifying management requirements.
It reduce the work of administrator without sacrificing security.
It's common to place UTM appliance at network border.

UTM appliance capabilities - 1. URL filtering - block access to sites based on URL.
2. Malware inspection - Screen incoming data for known malware and blocks it.
3. Content inspection - Monitors data streams and blocks malicious content.
4. DDoS mitigator - It attempts to detect DDoS attacks and blocks them.

Security issue with UTMs - Misconfigured content filter.
It can send important mails and information to spam or trash
